---
title: Subversion Deserves a Passing Thought Every Once in a While
date: 2024-07-17
taxonomies:
  tags:
  - version-control
  - subversion
  - git
---

Recently, for work, I've been learning Subversion
(or, for brevity, SVN).
I have some thoughts,
which I had been sharing with some friends on Discord.
After they expressed some interest in a more complete,
more well-thought-out version
of my thoughts,
I decided to turn my thoughts into this blog's inaugural post.

I, like many people,
learned version control using git.
My first brush with the concept of a VCS
came with my first brush with Java,
when, within my first tutorial,
I was recommended to use the Eclipse IDE
and GitHub.

GitHub, obviously, has only grown in popularity
since its inception
to the extent that,
up until recently,
I have never had to use anything other than git
for any project I've ever wanted
or needed to contribute to.
I was aware of SVN
but only as the second member
on every list of version control systems.
I had also at one point been on the hompeage of [Fossil](https://www2.fossil-scm.org/home/doc/trunk/www/index.wiki)
for whatever that's worth
and had heard whisperings
of something called Mercurial.

Recently, however,
I've become involved with several projects at work
which use SVN instead of git.
So I sat myself down at my desk,
pulled up [the SVN book](https://svnbook.red-bean.com/)
and prepared myself to be open-minded.
I love git,
and am a great promoter of its use,
but I was willing to entertain
the alternate side of the debate.

I am a few hours more experienced with Subversion now after
skimming chapter one,
studying chapter two and chapter three pretty intently
and, a bit later,
marathoning chapter four.
And I have some thoughts.

Before we continue further,
I'd like to lay down some expectations.
I expect the audience to have used git before
and to be able to understand all of its basic commands,
namely, `branch`, `tag`, and `merge`.
No knowledge of Subversion is required
as this article is meant to educate git users
on the differences between the two.
In fact, the less you know about Subversion,
the smarter I'll look.
If I misstate something,
maybe consider forgetting a bit about Subversion
so that I can keep up the illusion.

## The One Big Difference

Let's address the one main point first.
Almost all of the differences between svn and git
inspire fascinating debates
about the design of VCS tools
and, even more generally,
of computer tools in general.
How should various tools be made to fit together?
How much structure should a system enforce on its user?
These are questions
that I have every intent of circling back to,
but those differences are eclipsed
by the fact that SVN is the popular centralized VCS
and git is the popular distributed VCS.

### Distributed vs. Centralized

In a distributed model like git's,
(which I assume the reader is more familiar with)
every user downloads the full history
of the repository to their computer,
makes changes,
commits those changes locally,
then pushes those commits to the server.

In a centralized model like Subversion's,
the only complete copy of the repository
with all the history intact
is stored on the server.
Each user's working copy
tracks exactly one revision at a time.
Creating a commit in Subversion
updates the one canonical tree
on the server
to match your working copy.
The "commit" and "push" options are therefore
one and the same.

### SVN is an Always-Online Game

In comparison to a distributed model,
a centralized model is much simpler.
Having multiple copies of the same tree
(all with their own minimal modifications)
stored on many different devices,
whose changes must later be reconciled
in event of any kind of conflict,
is in theory much more cluttered and confusing
than the inherent simplicity
of a single canonical tree.
Initial checkouts are additionally
*significantly* faster
due to the fact that only one revision
needs to be downloaded.

On the other hand,
this means creating a commit
requires an internet connection.
As does interacting with the history of the repository
in any form,
including the simple act
of showing a log.
This naturally means that these operations
take much longer to perform
than the equivalent git commands,
scaling with your network speed.

Now, reader, I have Xfinity,
so my continuity of service is terrible.
I can recall at least one incident every month
where I was hacking on a project late at night
and my modem would spontaneously turn off.
I would pull up my Xfinity app,
switch my phone to use mobile data,
and confirm that, yep,
there's an outage in my area.
As all of my current personal projects use git,
this has never halted my development.
Sure, I won't be able to push,
but I  have never had to take a break from coding
due to an outage.

(Also, Xfinity, I know that these aren't
"unexpected outages" like you keep on claiming.
If you have to do maintenance on my network
every night for three nights
at the same time of day,
you can just tell me that you're doing maintenance.
Also, you have my phone number,
so there's no reason not to send me a text
when things like this happen.)

This problem already occurred for me
before I even made my first SVN commit!
I had read the first three chapters of the SVN book,
checked out a working copy of the repository,
and finally, I was ready to start working on my branch
when the SVN server started refusing my connections.
I emailed the sysadmin for the SVN server
to clarify the issue.
Turns out, the server had gone down.
It was for this exact reason
that I decided to dig into the fourth chapter
of the SVN book.

Outages can and will happen.
Because of that,
it is crucial to plan around them.
SVN still has no good answer to these questions.

### The Downside of Distributed

I would like to now bring up
the best argument *for* centralized version control.
This argument is made rather eloquently
in two blog posts
[(1)](http://blog.red-bean.com/sussman/?p=96)
[(2)](http://blog.red-bean.com/sussman/?p=20)
by Ben Collins-Sussman,
one of the originators of Subversion.
These are definitely worth a read.
They're short and sweet, but as fascinating
as an article with ten times their word count.
The basic gist involves two anti-patterns
that centralized models encourage
but decentralized models have limited protection against:
bombing and caving.

**Caving** or **crawling into a cave**
refers to the act of writing an entire new feature
offline and without communicating with the team.
**Bombing** or **dropping a code bomb**
refers to the act of committing such a feature
all in one go.
When a user drops a code bomb,
they deprive other collaborators of the ability to
help design the feature,
give input on code structure,
and
point out flaws in the feature's implementation.

When using a centralized VCS,
it is very easy to see this behavior
as maliciously anti-cooperative.
It takes a significant amount of effort
to never commit any of your changes
until they're all complete.
Furthermore, lumping the entire feature
together in one commit
defeats the purpose of version control
in the first place.
Simply put,
if you're dropping a code bomb
in a Subversion repository,
you're using Subversion wrong.

git, on the other hand,
seems to encourage this behavior
by way of its very design.
All development can be,
and by default is,
done without communicating
with the project's developers.
With Subversion,
you must go out of your way
to avoid showing your work
to other collaborators.
With git,
secrecy is the standard.
GitHub takes this one step further
by introducing the idea
that you can and should
create your own entire fork
of the repository
so that your code is never seen
until you decide to show it off.
It is possible to employ
good version control practices
with a distributed VCS,
but it doesn't promote these practices by default.

This argument has grabbed hold of my mind
as very few other concepts have
in my entire career.
This section was meant to be a paragraph
expressing my opinion that yes,
it's important to actively pursue
and gracefully receive code review,
but that Subversion's
dependence on constant internet access
is an intolerable price to pay
for this benefit.
I still do believe that,
but in the process of learning these things
I felt my philosophy on open-source contributing
gradually shift,
hence the much greater focus
I have placed on these posts.

### My Lukewarm Take

I don't know if it's possible
to conclude this section
in a satisfying way.
If I had to try,
I guess I would just say
that I still firmly believe
that a distributed VCS is better
than a centralized one,
but that we may find value
looking towards the centralized model
to provide a good example
of how we may reconsider
the structure of project contributions.

## Other Differences

It really is a shame
that git is the popular distributed VCS
and SVN is the popular centralized VCS
because, beyond the difference
in interaction model,
there are plenty of fascinating debates to be had
regarding the two systems' other differences,
but those arguments rarely get the spotlight
compared to the question
of distributed vs. centralized.
I'm clearly not above this
(see how much longer the previous section is
than any of the ones coming up?)
but I did find some elements of the SVN book
nothing less than fascinating.

### The Copy Operation

One fascinating difference
between SVN and git
is the list of basic operations
that you can perform on files.
In git, these are
create, modify, and delete.
A move is performed
by detecting the similarity
of an added and a deleted file.
Subversion has
create, modify, and delete,
just like git.
But it also has copy.
In particular,
this preserves the file's revision history
for both the original
and the copy.
A move in Subversion
is implemented as
running `svn copy`
followed by
`svn delete`.

I actually like
how Subversion's move operation
is more explicit than git's.
git's copy detection
can be a bit finnicky at times
if the move comes along
with additional changes
to the file being moved
or, occasionally,
the changes to other files.
Plus,
it just relies too much
on the machine detecting your intentions,
which I tend to distrust.

But that's not the only reason
that `svn copy` is cool.
Like I said,
SVN's copy operation
maintains the history of the object.
Under the hood, this works similarly
to a UNIX hardlink
where the underlying file object is the same,
but it is simply accessed
from different locations on the filesystem.
Unlike a hardlink, though,
the original and the copy
can be modified separately
from one another.

Okay, but how often do you need to clone
a file and work on a new copy
on the same branch?
True, that is a rare case.
However, that's not the only use case
for `svn copy`.

### Branching and Tagging

In git, branches and tags
are features
built directly into
the core system.
You may be surpised to hear
that this is not necessarily the case
in SVN.
Branching and tagging
are still supported,
but not as separate operations.

In Subversion,
the root of the repository
is generally not
the root of the code.
Instead, the main line of development
usually lives in a directory called `trunk`
and branches usually exist
as copies of `trunk`
placed inside of another root directory
called `branches`.
To create a branch
called `feature-1`,
the command to run
from the root of the repository is:

```sh
svn copy \
    https://example.com/svn/project/trunk \
    https://example.com/svn/project/branches/feature-1
```

This is an almost zero-cost operation
on the server side
because, remember,
`svn copy` does not create new objects,
just new links to old objects.
By then using `svn switch`
you can swap your working copy
from tracking `trunk` to `branches/feature-1`
and commit as normal.

Similarly,
tags live as copies of `trunk`
inside of `tags`.

Crucially, this allows the project administrator
much more leeway
regarding how to structure the project.
For example,
the maintainers might decide
to arrange branches and tags heirarchically,
for instance,
by giving each user
a directory within `branches`;
by creating different subdirectories
for releases, betas, and RCs
within `tags`;
or by defying the traditional directory structure entirely.
It all just depends
on what works best
for your project.

In a really neat way,
this also allows
for user-defined innovations
in repository structure,
which is not possible
when branches and tags
are first-class features
like in git.

To delete a branch,
you can run:

```sh
svn delete https://example.com/svn/project/branches/feature-1
```

And, you can also resurrect a branch
by running:
```sh
svn copy \
    https://example.com/svn/project/branches/feature-1@4541 \
    https://example.com/svn/project/branches/feature-1
```
where 4541 is replaced with the revision number
of the commit before the item was deleted.

(Oh right,
revisions are numbered
in sequential order.
This does not cause any issues
because one server is in control
of keeping track of the commits.)

You might find this inelegant,
and that is a completely fair opinion,
but I can't deny
the aesthetic appeal
that this has for me.

### Command Structure

Notice how versatile the `svn copy` command
has been so far.
This exemplifies a trend
that I noticed
in the way that Subversion
designs its tools.
There are generally fewer commands
that do a variety
of related tasks
as opposed to git's
many commands
which each have one or two applications each.
Despite this,
I find the syntax
of SVN commands
surprisingly consistent
and easy to follow.

I think there is an inherent merit to
having a small set of versatile tools.
The underlying operations
of every use case of `svn merge`
is the same,
even though the command is capable
of doing vastly different things.

This is where I would insert a rant
on the UNIX philosophy
if I were a better tech blogger.
But, I don't believe I have anything
productive to add to that conversation
at the moment.

## Closing Thoughts

So, as a git user,
should you drop everything and switch to Subversion?
No, obviously not.
git is the standard in version control,
for better or for worse.
Programmers had a choice
between a somewhat inconvenient system
in Subversion
and a much more convenient system
in git.
Is it any surprise
that we chose convenience,
even if the other option
encourages better development practices?
How very human of us.

If you are starting a new project
in 2024
and you choose something
other than git
for your version control system,
you limit your pool of potential contributors.
That may not be a bad thing.
If you have a project
that you plan to work on by yourself
or with a small team
and you're interested in trying SVN,
I say, there's no harm in it.
See how you like it!
Just, don't expect many more people
to flock to you.

I struggled with titling this article.
I considered titling it
"Subversion deserves a second chance"
but, really, it doesn't.
Distributed VCS
was developed in response to Subversion,
which had clear market dominance
up until its release.
No, Subversion had its time
and programmers voted it out.
I have no reason to believe
that it needs a second term.

However, subversion is fascinating
and does not deserve to be forgotten.
It is an undeniable piece
of this industry's rich history.
Additionally,
from a design standpoint,
there are some fascinating things
that we've seemingly just given up
with the move to git.

For that reason,
Subversion does deserve something
in our modern world.
Subversion deserves at the very least
a passing thought
every once in a while.
