---
title: My Quest to Supplant RMS
date: 2025-01-31
taxonomies:
  tags:
  - dev-community
  - rms
---

## RMS (Richard Matthew Stallman)

The letters "RMS" will be very familiar
to anyone who has so much as glimpsed into
the FOSS community.
For many people,
Richard Matthew Stallman
may indeed be the first person that they learn of
in the entire space.

His free software absolutism is funny.
The [lengths to which he will bend](https://stallman.org/stallman-computing.html)
so that he doesn't have
a single line of blasphemous nonfree code
running on any machine he's used
in the past ten years
are objectively hilarious.
At the same time,
because of how ardent he is in this,
it is easy to view this
as a kind of purity
to which us mortals could only aspire
because we enjoy getting things done.

Stallman is a spectacle.
He has done a lot
for the free software movement
and I firmly believe that we would be
in a much worse place without his contributions.
He is to be commended for that.

Commended, but not venerated.

Nowadays, RMS is a figure
who can't seem to escape controversy.
Underneath the natural fascination
with these kinds of quacks,
it's easy to forget that the people themselves
can actually be pretty crummy.
Stallman fits into this category.
Read [this blog post](https://drewdevault.com/2023/11/25/2023-11-26-RMS-on-sex.html)
or [this article](https://stallman-report.org/)
(**extreme content warning for both**)
to learn a bit more
about Stallman the man.
It doesn't matter which; they cover similar points.

But I don't just want to complain
about a person I find to be a thorn in the side
of the free software community.
I'm offering a solution of my own, you see.
Others have petitioned the FSF
to boot him out of leadership *again*
to no avail.
My solution
is to become the new RMS.

## RMS (Richard Michael Snider)

That's me.

My first name, Richard, is the same as Stallman's.
Additionally, all three of my initials
are the same as his initials.
Simply put,
I want to become the Richard that people think of
when they say RMS.

To clarify: I do *not* want
to replace him as the leader of the FSF.
My goal is simply to supplant him
as the owner
of the initialism RMS.

Is this a plausible goal?
Of course not.
Is it funny to pretend that I actually want to try?
It sure is!
So here we go.

## The Plan

The plan is simple:
I must make myself the subject of mass fascination
within the FOSS space
to the extent that Stallman's name
is forgotten to time.

The plan will be split into two parts.
First, I will make some commitments to you,
dear reader.
Second, I will ask you
to help me.

### My Part

I already have a website
which is clandestine in appearance
and which exists almost exclusively
to hold the canonical versions
of my opinions.
I will be writing posts on this blog
every month of this year.
With enough eyes here,
I will develop a following of people
who are endeared to me
on account of my silly anecdotes
and highly specific opinions on tech.

This is the functional purpose
of <https://stallman.org> these days,
so I consider this to be vital
to my plan.

The point where this diverges
from Stallman's approach
is that I will not say
anything terrible or heinous
that will make everyone hate me.
Nope, just good old silly tech takes
from this RMS.

I will also be modifying the language
on this site
to explicitly emphasize
that I am RMS (but not *that* RMS).

### Your Part

Your part is simple:
spread the knowledge
that there is a new RMS in town
and that he's someone
you can feel good about liking.
Link this blog everywhere.
Make sure people know
that I am coming
for Stallman's title of RMS.

But, I wouldn't be a true RMS
without a copypasta of my own.
Whenever someone is acting
excessively Stallman-esque,
post the following:

> Richard Stallman's achievements
> and leadership of the GNU project
> and the Free Software Foundation
> have done an impressive amount
> for the world of open source
> and those achievements should be recognized.
> He has serious issues, however,
> and should not be seen as incorruptible,
> which is a common sentiment in many newer entrants
> into the Free Software movement.
>
> I do believe that opinionated and uncompromising people
> are necessary to push the FOSS community even further;
> however, people who are rude, provocative, and insulting
> to other members of the FOSS community --
> people that ought to be allies instead of enemies --
> are dangerous and have more potential
> to cause harm than good.

And then if you plugged my blog at the end
that would also be nice.
